Material Ecology
Neri Oxman
*The holistic view of history of materialization (how it has been transformed)

That matter is secondary to shape constitutes the fallacy of design after craft. By nature,
and in its rite, the material practice of craft is informed by matter, its method of
fabrication, and by the environment (Semper, 1851). As in Nature, when creation begins
with matter, morphogenesis, or the generation of form, is a process engendered by the
physical forces of Nature (Thompson, 1942; Thom, 1975). Similarly, in the framework of
this essay, Material is not considered a subordinate attribute of form, but rather its
progenitor. Such is the story of form told from the point of view of matter, and it begins,
naturally, with form’s predicament.

Form’s Predicament: A Brief History
Over the long trajectory of architectural design history, the design and production of
artifacts has been characterized by a growing separation between form and matter. In
contradistinction to craft in which material and form are organically intertwined into a
tradition of making, modern design and production have historically evolved away from
this integration, or in its absence, towards the compartmentalization of form-making as a
process independent of its sources in material knowledge (Sennett, 2008). At least since
the Renaissance, with the emergence of architectural theories, form generation has
become somewhat of a self-directed and autonomous body of knowledge. Within
architecture and industrial design, the most culturally sensitive of the productive design
fields, form has grown in both eminence and temporal precedence in the design process
to the point that the condition of form preceding materialization has become normative
and virtually intuitive in contemporary design culture. With the exception of few
pioneering cases in contemporary design, the secularization and debasement of the
material realm has become axiomatic. Materiality has become, within the logic of the
modernist tradition, an agency secondary to form.

The Industrial Revolution lay open the door to machine-based manufacturing and mass
production. The creation of form was now to be conceived and created by the power of
industrial automation, detached and independent of environmental forces and influences.
The values promoted by ancient crafts (not unlike Nature’s way), pronounced by the
integration of material substance and construction methods, once within the province of
the craftsman, were abandoned while in their place emerged a design practice based on
values of mass production. Fast, cheap, repetitive and modular building types and parts
were synonymous with Ford’s visionary dream. Industry’s victory aside, it appeared as if
design’s propinquity to ancient crafts and its design expressions as portrayed by
vernacular forms of design was now doomed lost; and with it the intimate context of
material technologies. Eventually, this non-material approach to the design and the
automation of construction were to be reinforced

The Digital Revolution, which marked the shift from analog to digital technology, has
transformed the designer’s drafting board into a digital canvas. Form, it seemed, was now
divorced completely from the physical reality of its manifestation. This new design space
afforded much liberation in formal expression, but it has also broadened the gap between
form and matter, and made the hierarchical and sequential separation of modeling,
analysis and fabrication processes infinitely more pronounced.

The implementation and broad absorption of enhanced computational design tools in
architectural practice has, since the early nineties, motivated a renaissance of the
formalist project in architecture; geometrically complex shapes became emblems of
creativity in digital design environments and supported the design mastery of complex
geometries in form-generation. This formal and geometric design orientation has also
addressed "free form" design and architecture along with their enabling technologies as
part of the larger design phenomenon of "non-standard" form.
Designing (with) Nature: Towards a New Materiality

Today, perhaps under the imperatives of growing recognition of the ecological failures of
modern design, inspired by the growing presence of advanced fabrication methods,
design culture is witnessing a new materiality. Within the last decade in both industrial
design and architecture, a new body of knowledge is emerging within architectural praxis.
Examples of the growing interest in the technological potential of innovative material
usage and material innovation as a source of design generation are developments in
biomaterials, mediated and responsive materials, as well as composite materials. With the
growing relevance of “materialization”, new frontiers of material science and digital
fabrication are supporting the emergence of new perspectives in architectural and
industrial design. Thus the role of digital design research as the enabling environment of
the transformation to a new age of material-based design in various design disciplines has
become the cutting edge of computational design research. Here we are at the cusp of a
new paradigm inspired by the Troika structure of craft, at the interaction of Materials
Science, Digital Fabrication and the environment.

Material Ecology is an emerging field in design denoting informed relations between
products, buildings, systems, and their environment (Oxman, 2010). Defined as the study
and design of products and processes integrating environmentally aware computational
form-generation and digital fabrication, the field operates at the intersection of Biology,
Material Science & Engineering, and Computer Science with emphasis on
environmentally informed digital design and fabrication.
Bitmap Printing: Fabricating Nature

With the advent of digital fabrication techniques and technologies, digital material
representations such as voxels (3-D pixels) and maxels (a portmanteau of the words
'material' and 'voxel') have come to represent material ingredients, for instance in the
context of additive manufacturing processes. Designers are now able to compute material
properties and behavior integrated into form-generation procedures. 
